# Madlad

Madlad is an (unstable) fullscreen modal text editor that takes heavy inspiration from vi.

```
        ((((((((((()
       /  _____   /|
      /  /____/  /-|
     /          /--|
    /          /---|
   /__________/----|
       |-----------|
       |-----------|
   jgs '-----------'
```

Madlad's main standout feature is it's modularity. All commands and plugins are implemented as shell scripts. Even when you type a colon command, your text is passed straight to the shell to execute. These commands are called with a modified path that provides access to all the Madlad-specific commands like w, q and so on.

=> https://github.com/beauconstrictor/madlad Madlad on Github

## CSRPC

At the core of Madlad's modular scripting system is CSRPC, a tiny C library intended as an alternate to including a big scripting language dependency in your project - which is oftentimes larger than the project itself - or (god forbid) rolling your own DSL.

=> https://github.com/beauconstricor/csrpc CSRPC on Github

When you tell CSRPC to execute a command, it simply calls out to the shell to run that command and captures it's output. However, it always prefixes your command with a small script that defines your project's domain-specific environment (special programs in path, small base functions and so on). Everything is built in layers on top of CSRPC's base binary, 'sv' that is able to send messages back to CSRPC as the command runs.

CSRPC blocks for the lifetime of the command and listens for messages during that time. If a message is recieved, it is passed as-is to the project to handle it. In the case of Madlad, these messages implement base operations like inserting text, moving the cursor and changing settings.

## Syntax highlighting

In order to keep the codebase small, I didn't implement an LSP server or other fancy language parsing to get simple highlighting. Instead, highlighters are implemented as dynamic libraries that are loaded at runtime, all with a single 'highlight' routine that takes in a string of a single line and outputs a version with ANSI escape sequences in it, representing the highlighted text. While incredibly basic, and unable to support multiline structures, this system suffices for now.

## Text model

Madlad uses a rather unique model to represent text internally. In technical terms, a buffer is represented as a linked list of fixed-length line strings, with a separate gap buffer representing changes made to the current line. When you change line, those changes are flushed back to the linked list and the contents of the gap buffer are marked as irrelevant. Then, when you make you first edit in a different line, that line's contents are copied into the gap buffer and the change is made. This keep edits fast and allows a primitive single-step undo of certain types of operations. However, you can't undo things like entire line deletions as they never have to bother with the gap buffer in the first place.
